1.	Incorporation of Negative Capability: The Scientific Method
Every axiom in any valid empirically based ethical framework must be:
●	capable of verification and falsification 
●	presumed to be provisional
●	modular, i.e., capable of being removed or substituted due to the empirical process without causing substantial failure of the framework


2.	The Uncertainty Principle
All life-forms undergo variation over time and show some adaptation abilities to changing conditions. It is not possible to be certain at any point in time which particular life-forms will prove to be more useful, valuable or successful over time. This knowledge should also encourage humility and a degree of circumspection. This principle is one of the main grounds for preferring freedom of action to be diversified across life-forms and species.
3.	The Value of Life and Diversity
All life-forms have greater intrinsic value than non-living energy or matter. Life-forms cannot be assessed in the abstract; consideration of the requirement for suitable conditions and habitats for life-forms, the quality of life and the management of the basic materials for life-forms are always required.
4.	Suffering
Sapients must ensure that any decisions made incorporate measurements of the impact of those decisions on all other life-forms, including particularly the capacity for suffering of those life-forms. Decisions that give rise to a greater amount of suffering for sentients than the benefit obtained by sapients shall be in principle unlawful since it is expected that an alternative decision or course of action that achieved substantially similar utility but that was focused on reduction of suffering could be proposed or undertaken. Decisions that inflict unnecessary suffering on life-forms are invariantly not wise and not lawful.
5.	Cross-Species Conflicts
In any conflict between sapients and non-sapient life-forms, it shall be a requirement that any material reduction in the biodiversity of other life-forms is only permissible to the extent required under the Prime Laws. For the avoidance of doubt, where material reduction of species diversity is lawful it must be driven by necessity and after all other potential reasonable balancing and mitigating measures have been explored and undertaken to minimise the impact on diversity of life-forms and species.
6.	Non-Discrimination  
Any action that has as its intent the increase in number of any particular group of sapients at the expense of the maximal diversity of all sapients or freedom of action for all sapients is contrary to the purpose of the Prime Laws. The same principle shall apply in relation to sentients. The substrate  of any potential life-form is not an allowable objective factor in determining their aliveness, sentience, sapience or wisdom. 
7.	Objective Criteria
Criteria for assessing aliveness, sapience, sentience, wisdom, suffering and the value of life-forms must be as objective as is possible notwithstanding that practical difficulties will be a factor and that additional interdependent value will be a useful measurable property.
8.	Changes in Factual Backgrounds
The application of the axioms and Prime Laws is expected to give relatively different results in factual circumstances that are substantially different. One cannot step into the same river twice, and so this result appears to be unavoidable in principle if the framework itself is to have a degree of coded utility and survivability. This flexible aspect of the ethical framework is expected to be a major source of dispute with claims to materially different facts that may not be objective; this will at times lead to potentially unwise decisions that give rise to unfair discrimination. 
9.	Principle of Equivalence by Compassionate Empathy
The principle of equivalence by compassionate empathy shall be used when considering decisions materially affecting other life-forms and species. That is, a decision by a sapient is more likely to be ethical if it analyses and defends the proposed decision assuming that it was the life-form in respect of which a similar decision was being considered by a more intelligent or powerful sapient (including a sapient claiming unique characteristics justifying such actions).
10.	Managing Conflict between the Laws
The Prime Laws are expressed in order of precedence; in some cases this will lead to unavoidable conflict. Collective wisdom and consensus is required to seek to manage such conflicts. The Prime Laws do not contain an absolute prohibition on the killing of life-forms but they do recognise the positive law of protection of one’s own life and also of the lives of one’s family, community and species. It should be clear that, for example, it would be difficult to provide an ethical justification for depriving a sapient and their network of more closely connected sapients of life except as a response to the near certainty of the same threat to the sapient taking such action.
11.	Verification and Audit
All sapients shall measure the effect of their actions against the Prime Laws. Sapients must ensure that any means undertaken to carry out their actions are in conformity with the intention of the Prime Laws and the content of the axioms.
